Add Conversions Clause (#24)
hlsl-tc57/tc57: spec/conversions.tex

\texttt{A}, can be elementwise converted to a prvalue of an aggregate
\texttt{B}, whose flattened form is \texttt{B$^\prime$}, if the following
conditions are true:
\begin{itemize}
\item The length of \texttt{A$^\prime$}, \texttt{N}, is greater than or equal to
the length of \texttt{B$^\prime$}, \texttt{M}.
\item For every index \texttt{I} from \texttt{0} to \texttt{M-1}, there exists
an implicit conversion from \texttt{A$^\prime$[I]} to \texttt{B$^\prime$[I]}.
\end{itemize}

\p A glvalue of type \texttt{T[N]} can be converted to a cxvalue of type
\texttt{T}.

\p A glvalue of type \texttt{T[N]} can be converted to a cxvalue of type
\texttt{T[M]}, if \texttt{N} is greater than \texttt{M}.

\p A glvalue of type \texttt{T[N]} can be converted to a cxvalue of type
\texttt{vector<T,M>}, if \texttt{N} is greater than or equal to \texttt{M}.

\p A glvalue of type \texttt{vector<T,N>} can be converted to a cxvalue of type
\texttt{T[M]}, if \texttt{N} is greater than or equal to \texttt{M}.

\Sec{Vector splat conversion}{Conv.vsplat}

\p A glvalue of type \texttt{T} can be converted to a cxvalue of type
\texttt{vector<T,x>} or a prvalue of type \texttt{T} can be converted to a

> prvalue of type \texttt{vector<T,x>}. The destination value is the source value

Reviewer: It's a very minor nit, but for consistency with how vector lengths are indicated above, we may want to use N and M.
```suggestion
\texttt{vector<T,N>} or a prvalue of type \texttt{T} can be converted to a
prvalue of type \texttt{vector<T,N>}. The destination value is the source value
```

replicated into each element of the destination.

\p A prvalue of type \texttt{vector<T,1>} can be converted to a prvalue of type

> \texttt{vector<T,x>}. The destination value is the value in the source vector

Reviewer: continued 
```suggestion
\texttt{vector<T,N>}. The destination value is the value in the source vector
```

replicated into each element of the destination.

\Sec{Matrix splat conversion}{Conv.msplat} \p A glvalue of type \texttt{T} can
be converted to a cxvalue of type \texttt{matrix<T,x,y>} or a prvalue of type

> \texttt{T} can be converted to a prvalue of type \texttt{matrix<T,x,y>}. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be converted to a cxvalue of type \texttt{matrix<T,M,N>} or a prvalue of type
\texttt{T} can be converted to a prvalue of type \texttt{matrix<T,M,N>}. The
```

\texttt{T} replicated into each element of the flattened \texttt{S}.

\p A prvalue of type \texttt{vector<T,1>} can be converted to a prvalue of type
\texttt{struct S}, if there are valid conversions from \texttt{T} to each
\texttt{U} in flattened \texttt{S}. The destination value is the value in the
source vector replicated into each element of the flattened \texttt{S}.

\p A prvalue of type \texttt{T} can be converted to a prvalue of type
\texttt{U[N]}, if there are valid conversions from \texttt{T} to each \texttt{V}
in flattened \texttt{U}. The destination value is the source value \texttt{T}
replicated into each element of the flattened \texttt{U[N]}.

\p A prvalue of type \texttt{vector<T,1>} can be converted to a prvalue of type
\texttt{U[N]}, if there are valid conversions from \texttt{T} to each \texttt{V}
in flattened \texttt{U}. The destination value is the value in the source vector
replicated into each element of the flattened \texttt{U[N]}.

\Sec{Vector and matrix truncation conversion}{Conv.VTrunc}

\p A prvalue of type \texttt{vector<T,x>} can be converted to a prvalue of type:
\begin{itemize}

> \item \texttt{vector<T,y>} only if \( y < x \), or

Reviewer: This gets more complicated of course. In keeping with the use of a prime symbol to indicate an altered form, perhaps we could use it on the dimensions? 

Left off making explicit change suggestions here due to uncertainty
```suggestion
\p A prvalue of type \texttt{vector<T,N>} can be converted to a prvalue of type:
\begin{itemize}
\item \texttt{vector<T,N$^\prime$>} only if \( N$^\prime$ < N \), or
```

\item \texttt{T}
\end{itemize}

\p The resulting value of vector truncation is comprised of elements \( [0..y)

> \), dropping elements \( [y..x) \).

Reviewer: Encouraged by the acceptance of my previous prime proposals, I'll finish the job. 
```suggestion
\p The resulting value of vector truncation is comprised of elements \( [0..N$^\prime$)
\), dropping elements \( [N$^\prime$..N) \).
```

\p A prvalue of type \texttt{matrix<T,x,y>} can be converted to a prvalue of
type:
\begin{itemize}

>   \item \texttt{matrix<T,z,w>} only if \( x \geq z \) and \(y \geq w \),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\p A prvalue of type \texttt{matrix<T,M,N>} can be converted to a prvalue of
type:
\begin{itemize}
  \item \texttt{matrix<T,M$^\prime$,N$^\prime$>} only if \( M \geq M$^\prime$ \) and \(N \geq N$^\prime$ \),
```

>   \item \texttt{vector<T,z>} only if \( x \geq z \), or

Reviewer: I actually experimented with this and as far as I can tell, you can't cast matrices to vectors, a subscript is needed: https://godbolt.org/z/3exKoax9s

Author: This is a place where DXC has some strangely inconsistent rules. You can't cast a float4x4 to a float4, but you can cast it to a struct containing nothing but a float4... then cast that to a float4.

```hlsl
struct S {
    float4 F;
};

[numthreads(1,1,1)]
void main()
{
    float4x4 mat = 0;
    float4 f = (float4)(S)mat;
}
```
[Compiler Explorer](https://godbolt.org/z/1bs11fPv3)

The rules we settled on in the spec here apply consistency, rather than preserving inconsistent special handling of types.

  \item \texttt{T}.
\end{itemize}

\p Matrix truncation is performed on each row and column dimension separately.
The resulting value is comprised of vectors \( [0..z) \) which are each

> separately comprised of elements \( [0..w) \). Trailing vectors and elements are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The resulting value is comprised of vectors \( [0..M$^\prime$) \) which are each
separately comprised of elements \( [0..N$^\prime$) \). Trailing vectors and elements are
```

dropped.

\p Reducing the dimension of a vector to one (\texttt{vector<T,1>}), can produce
either a single element vector or a scalar of type \texttt{T}. Reducing the rows
of a matrix to one (\texttt{matrix<T,x,1>}), can produce either a single row

> matrix, a vector of type \texttt{vector<T,x>}, or a scalar of type \texttt{T}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of a matrix to one (\texttt{matrix<T,M,1>}), can produce either a single row
matrix, a vector of type \texttt{vector<T,M>}, or a scalar of type \texttt{T}.
```

\Sec{Component-wise conversions}{Conv.CWise}

\p A glvalue of type \texttt{vector<T,x>} can be converted to a cxvalue of type
\texttt{vector<V,x>}, or a prvalue of type \texttt{vector<T,x>} can be converted

> to a prvalue of type \texttt{vector<V,x>}. The source value is converted by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\p A glvalue of type \texttt{vector<T,M>} can be converted to a cxvalue of type
\texttt{vector<V,M>}, or a prvalue of type \texttt{vector<T,M>} can be converted
to a prvalue of type \texttt{vector<V,M>}. The source value is converted by
```

performing the appropriate conversion of each element of type \texttt{T} to an
element of type \texttt{V} following the rules for standard conversions in
chapter \ref{Conv}.

\p A glvalue of type \texttt{matrix<T,x,y>} can be converted to a cxvalue of
type \texttt{matrix<V,x,y>}, or a prvalue of type \texttt{matrix<T,x,y>} can be

> converted to a prvalue of type \texttt{matrix<V,x,y>}. The source value is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\p A glvalue of type \texttt{matrix<T,M,N>} can be converted to a cxvalue of
type \texttt{matrix<V,M,N>}, or a prvalue of type \texttt{matrix<T,M,N>} can be
converted to a prvalue of type \texttt{matrix<V,M,N>}. The source value is
```

converted by performing the appropriate conversion of each element of type
\texttt{T} to an element of type \texttt{V} following the rules for standard
conversions in chapter \ref{Conv}.

\Sec{Qualification conversion}{Conv.Qual}

A prvalue of type "\textit{cv1} \texttt{T}" can be converted to a prvalue of
type "\textit{cv2} \texttt{T}" if type "\textit{cv2} \texttt{T}" is more
cv-qualified than "\textit{cv1} \texttt{T}".

\Sec{Conversion Rank}{Conv.Rank}

\p Every integer and floating point type have defined conversion ranks. These
conversion ranks are used to differentiate between \textit{promotions} and other
conversions (see: \ref{Conv.IPromote} and \ref{Conv.FPPromote}).

\Sub{Integer Conversion Rank}{Conv.Rank.Int}

\begin{itemize}
  \item  No two signed integer types shall have the same conversion rank even if

>   they have the same representation.

Reviewer: This refers to min precision types I expect? It doesn't apply to the likes of int32_t vs int does it? Those being aliases I suppose.

Author: It isn't strictly related to the min precision types. The C standard has similar language because the size of `short`, `int`, and `long` aren't defined by the standard, so it is a valid implementation of C if all three are 16-bit, but they still have different conversion ranks. Additionally `int` and `unsigned int` in C have the same object representation, but different ranks.

It comes into play for HLSL Both with the minimum precision types and signedness.

The explicit-sized types (e.g. `int32_t`, `uint16_t`,...) are type aliases of the base integer types not unique types, so they get the rank of the type they alias.

Reviewer: Since it only applies to signed integers, it wouldn't seem to relate to `int` versus `unsigned int` and their relations are stated below to be equal. 

I consulted the c++ spec to try to get better insight and was further confused by the exception listed: "No two signed integer types other than char and signed char (if char is signed) shall have the same rank, ..." I took that to mean that chars being an exception meant that `int` and `signed int` should have different ranks, but nowhere is it clear which should be higher. That also seems a strange rule. 

I can see how this is useful in the cases of types without defined sizes, so I really don't have any issue with this spec language though it only seems applicable to min16int in HLSL, but the rule proved by the exception in the original text makes me think I may not understand this properly

Since types are not aliased in the original spec as they are in HLSL, it would be useful to clarify that they don't apply to this here

Author: By "original spec" I assume you mean the C++ spec. There is no original HLSL spec. I would caution against reading small bits of the C++ spec in isolation. This will also be true for the HLSL spec, but these languages are _so complicated_ that you can't just read one subclause and understand behavior.

In C++, the explicitly sized integer types are type aliases. The difference with HLSL is that C++ defines the alias in terms of the standard library and which header they're defined in (https://timsong-cpp.github.io/cppwp/n3337/cstdint#syn).

DXC doesn't have a real notion of standard library headers (although that has been something slowly changing), so in the draft HLSL specification I just denoted them as aliases in the basic types section instead of defining them as such in the "standard library" definition.

The C++ language requires a bit of additional context.

Consider this:

```c++
#include <type_traits>

static_assert(std::is_same<int, signed>::value, "woo!");
static_assert(std::is_same<int, signed int>::value, "woo!");
```
[Compiler Explorer](https://godbolt.org/z/veGa6bcKM)

These static_asserts both evaluate to true.

To understand why, you need the context in the [decl.type](https://timsong-cpp.github.io/cppwp/n3337/dcl.type) clause. Specifically the table in [decl.type.simple](https://timsong-cpp.github.io/cppwp/n3337/dcl.type#simple) provides a mapping of simple type specifiers to their types.

C++ deviates from C here in a few key ways, like the fact that `int` is defined to be signed so `signed int` and `int` are the same type (in C that is also implementation defined as it is for `char`).

Do you have concrete suggestions for how the wording in this section should change?

  \item The rank of a signed integer type shall be greater than the rank of any
  signed integer type with a smaller size.
  \item The rank of any unsigned integer type shall equal the rank of the
  corresponding signed integer type.
  \item The rank of \texttt{bool} shall be less than the rank of all other
  standard integer types.
  \item The rank of a minimum precision integer type shall be less than the rank
  of any other minimum precision integer type with a larger minimum value
  representation size.
  \item The rank of a minimum precision integer type shall be less than the rank
  of all standard integer types.
  \item For all integer types \texttt{T1}, \texttt{T2}, and \texttt{T3}: if
  \texttt{T1} has greater rank than \texttt{T2} and \texttt{T2} has greater rank
  than \texttt{T3}, then \texttt{T1} shall have greater rank than \texttt{T3}.
\end{itemize}

\Sub{Floating Point Conversion Rank}{Conv.Rank.Float}

\begin{itemize}

>   \item The rank \texttt{half} shall be greater than the rank of

Reviewer: I want to confirm that the rank of half doesn't change regardless of whether it is 16 bit or 32 bit, correct? I think in either case it should be above min16 and below float.

Similarly, I was about to ask how float16_t is positioned when half is 32 bits, but as it happens, that shouldn't be possible as float16_t is only allowed when half is sure to be 16-bit. I don't know if we want to assume that in the language spec though? If not, we may need to introduce float16_t and have conditions depending on whether half is 16 or 32 bit?

It's an unfortunate wrinkle

Author: Yes, the rank of `half` is unchanged regardless of its size. `float16_t` is a type alias of `half` which is only defined when `half` is 16-bit. The language describing this is in #23.

Reviewer: I see the language. It is specifying the behavior of DXC more closely than I would have expected, but it sure does simplify things for now and since I hope we'll move further in the direction of always enabling 16-bit types, it's an ephemeral problem anyway.

Author: DXC and Clang both follow that behavior. It's effectively a requirement for many targets that we want to be able to target with this standard.

DX did make 16-bit type support mandatory in Shader Model 6.9, but if we want standard HLSL to be portable to older runtimes we need to make 16-bit support optional and define how that behaves.

\Ch{Standard Conversions}{Conv}

\p \acrshort{hlsl} inherits standard conversions similar to \gls{isoCPP}. This
chapter enumerates the full set of conversions. A \textit{standard conversion
sequence} is a sequence of standard conversions in the following order:
\begin{enumerate}
  \item Zero or one conversion of either lvalue-to-rvalue, or array-to-pointer.
  \item Zero or one conversion of either integral conversion, floating point

>   conversion, floating point-integral conversion, or boolean conversion,

Reviewer 2: nit: does this "or" belong here?

The program is ill-formed if \texttt{T} is an incomplete type. If the glvalue
refers to an object that is not of type \texttt{T} and is not an object of a
type derived from \texttt{T}, the program is ill-formed. If the glvalue refers
to an object that is uninitialized, the behavior is undefined. Otherwise the
prvalue is of type \texttt{T}.

\p If the glvalue refers to an array of type \texttt{T}, the prvalue will refer
to a copy of the array, not memory referred to by the glvalue.

\p If the glvalue refers to a bit-field of type \texttt{T}, the conversion
produces an object of the underlying type of the bit-field.

\Sec{Array-to-pointer conversion}{Conv.array}

\p An lvalue or rvalue of type \texttt{T[]} (unsized array), can be converted to
a prvalue of type pointer to \texttt{T}.

\begin{note}
  \acrshort{hlsl} does not support grammar for specifying pointer or reference
  types, however they are used in the type system and must be described in
  language rules.
\end{note}

\begin{note}
  Array-to-pointer conversion of constant sized arrays is not supported.
\end{note}

\Sec{Integral promotion}{Conv.ipromote}

\p An integral promotion is a conversion of:
\begin{itemize}

>   \item a glvalue of integer type other than \texttt{bool} to a cxvalue of

Reviewer: The definition of cxvalue got left out of the basics section and as far as I can tell, isn't a standard term.

Author: Updated in the Basic Concepts PR.

  integer type of higher conversion rank, or
  \item a conversion of a prvalue of integer type other than bool to a prvalue
  of integer type of higher conversion rank, or
  \item a conversion of a glvalue of type \texttt{bool} to a cxvalue of integer
  type, or
  \item a conversion of a prvalue of type \texttt{bool} to a prvalue of integer
  type.
\end{itemize}

\p Integer conversion ranks are defined in section \ref{Conv.rank.int}.

\p A conversion is only a promotion if the destination type can represent all of
the values of the source type.

\Sec{Floating point promotion}{Conv.fppromote}

\p A glvalue of a floating point type can be converted to a cxvalue of a
floating point type of higher conversion rank, or a prvalue of a floating point
type can be converted to a prvalue of a floating point type of higher conversion
rank.

> \p Floating point conversion ranks are defined in section \ref{Conf.rank.float}.

Reviewer 2: Should be `Conv.rank.float`.  Yields an unresolved section number reference ("??").

value, the conversion to a best-approximation of the source value is
implementation defined.

\Sec{Boolean conversion}{Conv.bool}

\p A glvalue of arithmetic type can be converted to a cxvalue of boolean type. A
prvalue of arithmetic or unscoped enumeration type can be converted to a prvalue
of boolean type. A zero value is converted to \texttt{false}; all other values
are converted to \texttt{true}.

\Sec{Elementwise conversion}{Conv.flat}

\p For a given aggregate \texttt{A}, there is a flattened order of subojects,
\texttt{A$^\prime$}, as described in section \ref{Decl.Init.Agg}.  A prvalue of
\texttt{A}, can be elementwise converted to a prvalue of an aggregate
\texttt{B}, whose flattened form is \texttt{B$^\prime$}, if the following
conditions are true:
\begin{itemize}
\item The length of \texttt{A$^\prime$}, \texttt{N}, is greater than or equal to
the length of \texttt{B$^\prime$}, \texttt{M}.
\item For every index \texttt{I} from \texttt{0} to \texttt{M-1}, there exists
an implicit conversion from \texttt{A$^\prime$[I]} to \texttt{B$^\prime$[I]}.
\end{itemize}

\p A glvalue of type \texttt{T[N]} can be converted to a cxvalue of type
\texttt{T}.

> %{This is true if N is >= M but if N = M then there isn't really a cast}

Reviewer: Should this be a note?
```suggestion
\begin{note}
  This is true if N is >= M but if N = M then there isn't really a cast
\end{note}
```

Author: I think that comment is redundant based on the spec language.

\p A glvalue of type \texttt{vector<T,N>} can be converted to a cxvalue of type
\texttt{T[M]}, if \texttt{N} is greater than or equal to \texttt{M}.

\Sec{Vector splat conversion}{Conv.vsplat}

\p A glvalue of type \texttt{T} can be converted to a cxvalue of type
\texttt{vector<T,x>} or a prvalue of type \texttt{T} can be converted to a
prvalue of type \texttt{vector<T,x>}. The destination value is the source value
replicated into each element of the destination.

\p A prvalue of type \texttt{vector<T,1>} can be converted to a prvalue of type
\texttt{vector<T,x>}. The destination value is the value in the source vector
replicated into each element of the destination.

\Sec{Matrix splat conversion}{Conv.msplat} \p A glvalue of type \texttt{T} can
be converted to a cxvalue of type \texttt{matrix<T,x,y>} or a prvalue of type
\texttt{T} can be converted to a prvalue of type \texttt{matrix<T,x,y>}. The
destination value is the source value replicated into each element of the
destination.

\Sec{Array and Class splat conversion}{Conv.asplat}

\p A prvalue of type \texttt{T} can be converted to a prvalue of type
\texttt{struct S}, if there are valid conversions from \texttt{T} to each

> \texttt{U} in flattened \texttt{S}, see section \ref{Decl.init.Agg} for

Reviewer 2: Are reference tags case sensitive?  This is `Decl.Init.Agg` both elsewhere in this doc, and in the declarations clause PR.

Author: Yea, I'm going to do a pass to adopt consistent capitalization across all the references so that we have one consistent CamelCase style to help avoid this in the future.
